The Project Gutenberg eBook of Decidedly Odd, by Edwin Balmer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this eBook.

Title: Decidedly Odd

Author: Edwin Balmer
        William MacHarg

Release Date: March 18, 2021 [eBook #64851]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank. (This file was produced from images generously made
             available by The Pulp Magazine Project)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECIDEDLY ODD ***




DECIDEDLY ODD

by Edwin Balmer and William MacHarg




CHAPTER I. ADVERTISED IN CIPHER.

One rainy morning in April, Luther Trant sat alone in his office. On his
wrist as he bent closely over a heap of typewritten pages spread before
him on his desk, a small instrument in continual motion ticked like a
watch. It was for him an hour of idleness; he was reading fiction. And,
with his passion for making visible and recording the workings of the
mind, he was taking a permanent record of his feelings as he read.

The instrument strapped on Trant’s arm was called a sphygmograph. It
carried a small steel rod which pressed tightly on his wrist artery.
This rod, rising and falling with each rush of the blood wave through
the artery, transmitted its motion to a system of small levers. These
levers operated a pencil point, which touched the surface of a revolving
drum. Trant had adjusted around this drum a strip of smoked paper, the
pencil point traced on its sooty surface, and a continuous wavy line
which rose and fell with each beat of the psychologist’s pulse.

As the interest of the story gripped Trant, this wavy line grew flatter,
with elevations farther apart. When the interest flagged, his pulse
returned to its normal heat and the line became regular in its
undulations. At an exciting incident, the elevations swelled to greater
height. And the psychologist was noting with satisfaction how the
continual variations of the line gave definite record of the story’s
sustained power, when he was interrupted by the sharp ring of his
telephone.

An excited, choleric voice came over the wire:

“Mr. Trant? ... This is Cuthbert Edwards, of Cuthbert Edwards & Co.,
Michigan Avenue. You have received a communication from my son Winton
this morning? Is he there now? ... No? Then he will reach your office in
a very few minutes. I want nothing done in the matter! You understand! I
will reach your office myself as soon as possible--probably within
fifteen minutes--and explain.”

The sentence ended with a bump, as Cuthbert Edwards slammed his receiver
back upon its hook. The psychologist, who would have recognized the
name--even if not forewarned by the communication he had received that
morning--as the conservative head of one of the oldest and most
“exclusive” families of New England Puritan extraction, detached the
sphygmograph from his wrist and drew toward him and reread the fantastic
advertisement that had come to him inclosed in Winton Edwards’ letter.
Apparently it had been cut from the classified columns of one of the big
dailies:

  Eva: The seventeenth of the tenth! Since you and your own are safe, do
  you become insensible that others now again wait in your place? And
  those that swing in the wind! Have you forgot? If you remember and are
  true, communicate. And you can help save them all! N. M. 15, 45, 11,
  31; 7, 13, 32, 45; 13, 36.

The letter, to the first page of which the advertisement had been
pinned, was dated the same day he had received it, postmarked three
o’clock that morning, and written in the scrawling hand of a young man
under strong emotion:

  Dear Sir: Before coming to consult you, I send for your consideration
  the advertisement you will find inclosed. This advertisement is the
  one tangible piece of evidence of the amazing and inexplicable
  influence possessed by the “hammering man” over my fiancee, Miss Eva
  Silber. This influence has forced her to refuse to marry me, to tell
  me that I must think of her only as if she were dead.

  This advertisement appeared first on last Monday morning in the
  classified columns of three Chicago papers published in English, and
  in the German _S----_. On Tuesday, it appeared in the same morning
  papers and in four evening papers and the German _A----_. It was
  submitted to each newspaper by mail, with no address or information
  other than the text as here printed, with three dollars in currency
  inclosed in each case to pay for its insertion. For Heaven’s sake
  help me, Mr. Trant! I will call on you this morning, as soon as I
  think you are at your office.                          WINTON EDWARDS.

The psychologist had hardly finished this letter, when rapid footsteps
in the corridor outside stopped at his office door. Never had there been
a more striking entrance into Trant’s office than that of the young man
who now burst in--disheveled, wet with the rain, his eyes red for want of
sleep.

“She has left me, Mr. Trant!” he cried, with no prelude. “She has gone!”

As he sank dazedly into a chair, he pulled from his pocket a small
leather case and handed it to the psychologist. Within was the
photograph of a remarkably handsome girl in her early twenties--a girl
sobered by some unusual experience, as showed most plainly in the poise
of her little round head wrapped with its braid of lustrous hair, and
the shadow that lurked in the steadfast eyes, though they were smiling,
and the full lips were smiling, too.

“You are, I suppose, Mr. Winton Edwards,” said Trant, picking up the
letter on his desk. “Now, if you have come to me for help, Mr. Edwards,
you must first give me all the information of the case that you have.”

“That is Eva Silber,” young Edwards replied. “Miss Silber had been
employed by us a little over a year. She came to us in answer to an
advertisement. She gave us no information in regard to herself when she
came, and she has given none since. Because of her marked ability my
father put her in complete charge of the house’s correspondence with our
foreign agents; for in addition to English, she speaks and writes
fluently German, French, the Magyar dialect of Hungary, Russian, and
Spanish.

“I was in love with her almost from the first,” he went on, “in spite of
my father’s objection to the attachment. The first Edwards of our
family, Mr. Trant, came to Massachusetts in 1660. So my father has the
idea that anybody who came later cannot possibly be our equal; and Miss
Silber, who came to America to work--the women of our family have stayed
idly at home--did not get here until a short time ago.”

“Coming from where?” asked the psychologist.

“I don’t know,” the young man answered simply. “I think she is an
Austrian, for the Magyar dialect she speaks is the least likely of the
languages she knows to have been learned by choice. I spoke of this to
her once, and she did not contradict me.” He paused to control his
agitation, and then went on: “She had, so far as I know, no friends. So
you see, Mr. Trant, that all that makes my father’s consent to my
marrying her only a greater proof of her evident goodness and charm!”

“Then he did consent to your marrying her?” Trant interjected.

“Yes; two weeks ago. I had begged and begged her, but she never had been
willing to give me her promise. A week ago last Wednesday, after she had
known for more than a week that father had agreed to it, she finally
consented--but only conditionally. I was going away for a short business
trip, and Eva told me that she wanted that much time to think it over,
but that when I came back she would tell me all about herself and, if I
still wanted to marry her after hearing it, she would marry me. I never
imagined that any one could force her to change her mind!”

“Yet she did change her mind, you think?” put in Trant.

“Without question, Mr. Trant!” was the emphatic reply. “And it seems to
have been wholly because of the visit of the ‘hammering man,’ who came
to see her at the office the day after I left Chicago. It sounds queer
to call him that, but I do not know his name, nor anything about him,
except the fact of his hammering.”

“But if the people in the office saw him, you have at least his
description,” said Trant.

“They say he was unusually large, gross, almost bestial in appearance,
and red headed. He was plainly dressed. He asked to see Eva. When she
caught sight of him she turned back and refused to speak with him.”

“How did the man take her refusal?” was the next question.

“He seemed very angry for a moment, and then went out into the public
corridor,” replied Edwards. “For a long time he walked back and forth in
the corridor, muttering to himself. The people in the office had
practically forgotten him when they were startled by a noise of
hammering or pounding in the corridor. One wall of the inner office
where Eva had her desk is formed by the wall of the corridor, and the
man was beating upon it with his fists.”

“Hammering excitedly?” asked Trant.

“No; in a rather deliberate and measured manner. My father, who heard
the sound, says it was so very distinctive as to be recognizable if
heard again.”

“Odd!” said Trant. “And what effect did this have on Miss Silber?” “That
is the strangest part of it. Eva had seemed worried and troubled ever
since she learned the man was there, but this hammering seemed to
agitate and disturb her out of all reason. At the end of the day’s
business she went to my father and abruptly resigned the position of
trust she held with us. My father, surprised and angry at her refusal to
give a reason for this action, accepted her resignation.”

“You do not happen to know whether, before this visit, Miss Silber had
received any letter which troubled her,” said Trant.

“She may have received a message at her house, but not at the office,”
admitted the young man. “However, there is something still more
mysterious. On Sunday, my father, sorry that he had accepted her
resignation so promptly, in view of our relationship, ordered the motor
and went out to see her. But--good heavens!”




CHAPTER II. THE ANNIVERSARY.


The loud rat-tat-tat of a cane had shaken Trant’s door and cracked its
ground glass from corner to corner, and the door was flung open to admit
a determined little man, whose carefully groomed pink-and-whiteness was
accentuated by his anger.

“Winton, go home!” The elder Edwards glared sternly at his son, and then
about the office. “Mr. Trant--you are Mr. Trant, I suppose--I want you to
have nothing to do with this matter. I prefer to let the whole affair
drop where it is.”

“I reserve the right, Mr. Edwards,” the psychologist said, rising, “to
take up or drop cases only as I myself see fit. I have heard nothing
yet in your son’s story to explain why you do not want the case
investigated.”

“Then you shall have it explained,” Cuthbert Edwards answered. “I called
on Miss Silber last Sunday, and it is because of what I learned there
that I want Winton to have nothing more to do with her. I went to Miss
Silber on Sunday, Mr. Trant, feeling that I had been too hasty on
Thursday. I offered her an apology and was reasoning with her when I
heard suddenly, in an upper room, the same noises that had so disturbed
the quiet of my office on Thursday afternoon!”

“You mean the hammering?” asked Trant.

“Precisely, Mr. Trant; the hammering! If you had heard that sound
yourself, you would know that it is a very definite and distinctive
blow, given according to some intentional arrangement. I no sooner heard
it and saw the uneasiness it again caused in Miss Silber, than I became
certain that the same disreputable man who had been to see her at my
office was then housed in her very home. I insisted, as she was my son’s
promised wife, on searching the house.”

“Did you find him?” Trant inquired sharply.

“No, I did not, Mr. Trant, though I went into every room and opened
every closet. I found only what appeared to be the usual inmates of the
house--Miss Silber’s father and the woman who keeps house for her.”

“Miss Silber’s father! Has Miss Silber a father?” Trant interrupted.

“He is hardly worth mentioning, Mr. Trant,” the younger Edwards
explained. “He must have suffered at some time from a brain trouble that
has partly deprived him of his faculties, I believe. Neither he nor the
housekeeper, who is not in Eva’s confidence, is likely to be able to
help us in this matter.”

“The man may have slipped out of the house unseen,” suggested Trant.

“Quite impossible,” Cuthbert Edwards asserted. “Miss Silber lived in a
little house west of Ravenswood. There are very few houses, none within
at least a quarter of a mile of her. The ground is flat, and no one
could have got away without being seen by me.”

“Your story so far is certainly very peculiar,” the psychologist
commented, “and it gains interest with every detail. Are you certain it
was not this second interview with your father”--he turned again to the
younger man--“that made Miss Silber refuse you?”

“No; it was not. When I got back yesterday and learned from father what
had happened, I went out at once to Eva at her home. She had changed
utterly; not in her feelings toward me, for I felt certain even then
that she loved me--but an influence--the influence of this man--had come
between us. She told me there was no longer any chance of her marrying.
She refused the explanation she had promised to make to me. She told me
to go away and forget her, or--as I wrote you--to think of her as dead.

“You can imagine my feelings,” he went on. “I could not sleep last night
after I had left her. As I was wandering about the house, I saw the
evening paper lying spread out on the library table and my eye caught
her name in it. It was in the advertisement that I sent you, Mr. Trant.
Late as it was, I called up the newspaper offices and learned the facts
regarding its insertion. At daybreak I motored out to see Eva. The house
was empty. I went round it in the mud and rain, peering in at the
windows. Even the housekeeper was no longer there, and the neighbors
could tell me nothing of the time or manner of their leaving; nor has
any word come from her to the office.”

“That is all, then,” the psychologist said thoughtfully. “‘The
seventeenth of the tenth’” he reread the beginning of the advertisement.
“That is, of course, a date, the seventeenth of the tenth month, and it
is put there to recall to Miss Silber some event of which it would be
sure to remind her. I suppose you know of no private significance this
date might have for her, or you would have mentioned it.”

“None on the seventeenth; no, Mr. Trant,” young Edwards replied. “If it
were only the thirtieth I might help you; for I know that on that date
Eva celebrates some sort of anniversary at home.”

Trant opened a bulky almanac lying on his desk, and as he glanced
swiftly down the page his eyes flashed suddenly with comprehension.

“You are correct, I think, as to the influence of the hammering man on
her movements,” the psychologist said. “But as to her connection with
the man and her reasons, that is another matter. But of that I cannot
say till I have had half an hour to myself at the Crerar Library.”

“The library, Mr. Trant?” cried young Edwards, in surprise.

“Yes; and, as speed is certainly essential, I hope you still have your
motor below.”

As young Edwards nodded, the psychologist seized his hat and gloves and
his instrument case, and preceded the others from the office. Half an
hour later he descended from the library to rejoin the Edwardses waiting
in the motor.

“The man who inserted that advertisement--the hammering man, I believe,
of whom we are in search,” he announced briefly, “is named N. Meyan, and
he is lodging, or at least can be addressed at No. 7 Coy Court. The case
has suddenly developed far darker and more villainous aspects even than
I feared. Please order the chauffeur to go there as rapidly as
possible.”

Coy Court, at which, twenty minutes later, he bade young Edwards stop
the motor, proved to be one of those short, intersecting streets that
start from the crowded thoroughfare of Halstead Street, run a squalid
block or two east or west, and stop short against the sooty wall of a
foundry or machine shop. No. 7, the third house on the left--like many of
its neighbors, whose window’s bore Greek, Jewish, or Lithuanian
signs--was given up in the basement to a store, but the upper floors were
plainly devoted to lodgings.

The door was opened by a little girl of eight. “Does N. Meyan live
here?” the psychologist asked. “And is he in?” Then, as the child nodded
to the first inquiry and shook her head at the second: “When will he be
back?”

“He comes to-night again, sure,” she said. “Perhaps sooner. But
to-night, or to-morrow, he goes away for good. He have paid only till
to-morrow.”

“I was right, you see, in saying we had need for haste,” Trant said to
young Edwards. “But there is one thing we can try, even though he is not
here. Let me have the picture you showed me this morning!”

He took from Winton’s hand the picture of Eva Silber, opened the leather
case, and held it so the child could sec. “Do you know that lady?”

“Yes!” The child showed sudden interest. “It is Mr. Meyan’s wife.”

“His wife!” cried young Edwards. “So,” the psychologist said swiftly to
the little girl, “you have seen this lady here?”

“She comes last night.” The child had grown suddenly loquacious.
“Because she is coming, Mr. Meyan makes trouble that we should get a
room ready for her. Already she has sent her things. And we get ready
the room next to his. But because she wants still another room, she goes
away last night again. Rooms come not so easy here; we have many people.
But now we have another, so to-night she is coming again.”

“Does it now seem necessary for us to press this investigation further?”
Cuthbert Edwards asked caustically. As he spoke, the sound of measured,
heavy blows came to them down the dark stair apparently from the second
floor of the building. The elder Edwards cried excitedly and
triumphantly: “What is that? Listen! That man--Meyan, if it is Meyan--must
be here; for that is the same hammering.”

“This is even better luck than we could have expected!” exclaimed the
psychologist; and he slipped past the child and sped swiftly up the
stairs, with his companions closely following. At the head of the flight
he passed a stunted woman whose marked resemblance to the little girl
below established her at once as mother and landlady, and a trembling
old man. With the elder Edwards, Trant tore open door after door of the
rooms upon that floor, and the floor above, before the woman could
prevent him. The rooms were all empty.

“Meyan must have escaped!” said Cuthbert Edwards as they returned,
crestfallen, to the second story. “But we have proof at least that the
child spoke the truth in saying Miss Silber had been here to see him,
for she hardly would have allowed her father to come here without her.”

“Her father--so this is Miss Silber’s father!” Trant swiftly turned to
examine with the keenest interest the old man, who shrank back,
shivering and shuddering, in a corner. Even in that darkened hall he
conveyed to the psychologist an impression of hoary whiteness. His hair
and beard were snowy white, the dead pallor of his skin was the
unhealthy whiteness of potato shoots that have sprouted in a cellar, and
the iris of his eyes had faded until it was almost indistinguishable.
Yet there remained something in the man’s appearance which told Trant
that he was not really old--that he still should be moving, daring,
self-confident, a leader among men, instead of cringing and shrinking
thus at the slightest move of these chance visitors.

“Meyan? Is it because you are looking for Meyan that you have made all
this disturbance?” the woman broke in. “Then why didn’t you ask? For now
he is at the saloon, I think, only across the street.”

“Then we will go there at once,” said Trant. “But I will ask you”--he
turned to the elder Edwards--“to wait for us at the motor, for two of us
will be enough for my purpose, and more than two may defeat it by
alarming Meyan.”

Trant descended the stairs, took his instrument case from the motor, and
with young Edwards crossed the street quickly to the saloon.




CHAPTER III. THE CLEVER PENCIL.


A dozen idlers leaned against the bar or sat in chairs tilted against
the wall. Trant examined these idlers one after another closely. The
only man at whom he did not seem to look was one who, as the only
red-headed man in the place, must plainly be Meyan. “Red-headed” was the
only description they had of him, but meager as it was, with the
landlady’s statement that he was in the saloon, Trant resolved to test
him.

The psychologist took an envelope from his pocket and wrote rapidly upon
the back of it. “I am going to try something,” he whispered, as he
flicked the envelope along the bar to Edwards. “It may not succeed, but
if I am able to get Meyan into a test, then go into that back room and
speak aloud what I have written on the envelope, as if you had just come
in with somebody.” Then, as Edwards nodded his comprehension, the
psychologist turned easily to the man nearest him at the bar--a pallid
Lithuanian sweatshop worker.

“I suppose you can stand a lot of that?” Trant nodded at the glass of
pungent whisky. “Still--it has its effect on you. Sends your heart action
up--quickens your pulse.”

“What are you?” asked the man, grinning. “Temperance lecturer?”

“Something like that,” the psychologist answered. “At least, I can show
you the effect whisky has upon your heart.”

He picked up the instrument case and opened it. The loungers gathered
about him, and Trant saw with satisfaction that they thought him an
itinerant temperance advocate. They stared curiously at the instrument
he had taken from its case.

“It goes on the arm,” he explained. The Lithuanian, with a grin toward
his companions, began to turn up his sleeve. “Not you,” Trant said; “you
just had a drink.”

“Is there a drink in this? I ain’t had a drink since breakfast!” said
another who pushed up to the table and bared his blue-veined forearm for
Trant to fasten the instrument to it.

Young Winton Edwards, watching as curiously as the others, saw Trant
fasten the sphygmograph on the mechanic’s arm. and the pencil point
commence to trace on the sooty surface a wavy line, the normal record of
the mechanic’s pulse.

“You see it!” Trant pointed out to the others the record, as it unwound
slowly from the drum. “Every thought you have, every feeling, every
sensation--taste, touch, smell--changes the beating of your heart and
shows upon this little record. I could show through that whether you had
a secret you were trying to conceal, as readily as I will show the
effect whisky has on you, or as I can learn whether this man likes the
smell of onion.” He took from the free lunch on the bar a slice of
onion, which he held under the man’s nose. “Ah! You don’t like onion!
But the whisky will make you forget its smell, I suspect.”

As the odor of the whisky reached the man’s nostrils, the record
line--which when he smelled the onion had become suddenly flattened with
elevations nearer together, as the pulse beat weakly but more
quickly--began to return to the shape it bad had at first. He tossed off
the liquor, rolling it upon his tongue, and all saw the record regain
its first appearance; then, as the stimulant began to take effect, the
pencil point lifted higher at each rise and the elevations became
farther apart. They stared and laughed.

“Whisky effects you about normally, I should say.” Trant began to
unfasten the sphygmograph from the man’s wrist. “I have heard it said
that black-haired men, like you, feel its effect least of all;
light-haired men more; men with red hair like mine feel the greatest
effect, it’s said. We red-haired men have to be careful with whisky.”

“Hey! There’s a red-headed man,” one of the crowd cried suddenly,
pointing. “Try it on him.”

Two enthusiasts at once broke from the group and rushed eagerly to
Meyan. He had continued, inattentive through all, to read his newspaper,
but now he laid it down. Trant and young Edwards, as he rose and
slouched half curiously toward them, could see plainly for the first
time his strongly boned, coarsely powerful face, and heavy-lidded eyes,
and the grossly muscular strength of his big-framed body.

“Pah! your watered whisky,” he jeered in a strangely thick and heavy
voice, when the test had been explained to him. “I am used to stronger
drinks!” He grinned derisively at the surrounding faces, kicked a chair
up to the table, and sat down. Trant glanced toward Edwards, and Edwards
moved silently back from the group and disappeared unnoticed through the
partition door. Then the psychologist swiftly adjusted the sphygmograph
upon the outstretched arm and watched intently an instant until the
pencil point had caught up the strong and even pulse which set it rising
and falling in perfect rhythm.

As he turned to the bar for the whisky, the rear door slammed and the
voice Trant was expecting spoke: “Yes, it was at Warsaw the police took
him. He was taken without warning from his friend’s house. What next?
The prisons are full, but they keep on filling them; the graveyards will
be full next!”

“Look! Look!” cried the Lithuanian beside Trant at the table, “he
bragged about watered whisky, but just the sight of it makes his heart
beat bigger and stronger!”

Trant bent eagerly over the smoked paper, watching the stronger, slower
pulse beat which the record showed.

“Yes; before he takes the whisky his pulse is strengthened,” Trant
answered; “for that is how the pulse acts when a man is pleased and
exults!”

He waited now, almost inattentively, while Meyan drank the whisky and
the others grew silent in defeat as the giant’s pulse, true to his
boast, showed almost no variation under the fiery liquor.

“Fall, such child foolishness!” Meyan, with steady hand, set the glass
back on the table. Then, as Trant unclasped the straps around his arm,
he rose, yawned in their faces, and lounged out of the place.

The psychologist turned to meet young Edwards as he hurried in, and
together they went out to join the father at the motor.

“We can do nothing sooner than tonight,” Trant said shortly, an
expression of keen anxiety on his face. “I must learn more about this
man, but my inquiries must be conducted alone. If you will meet me here
again at seven o’clock to-night, say at the pawnbroker’s shop we passed
upon the corner, I hope to be able to solve the mystery of the hammering
man, and the influence he is undoubtedly exerting on Miss Silber. I may
say,” he added, after a moment, “that I would not attach too much weight
to the child’s statement that Miss Silber is Meyan’s wife. It is
understood, then, that you will meet me here to-night, as I have
suggested.”

He nodded to his clients, and ran to catch a passing street car.




CHAPTER IV. WITH NERVES OF STEEL.


Promptly at seven o’clock, in accordance with Trant’s directions, young
Winton Edwards and his father entered the pawnshop and started
negotiations for a loan. Almost immediately after they arrived there,
Trant joined them, still carrying in his hand his instrument case. The
boy and his father closed their negotiations and went out with Trant
into the street. They saw then, to their surprise, that the psychologist
was not alone. Two men were awaiting them, each of whom carried a case
like Trant’s. The elder of the two, a man between fifty and sixty years
old, met young Edwards’ stare with a benignant glance of his pale blue
eyes through an immense pair of gold spectacles. The other was young,
pale, broad-browed, with an intelligent face, and his gaze was fixed in
a look of dreamy contemplation. They were dressed as mechanics, but
their general appearance was not that of workmen.

The door of Meyan’s lodging house was opened to them by the landlady.
She led the way to the second floor, but paused to show a room to Trant.

“That is Meyan’s room,” Trant explained. “We will wait for him over
here.” He followed the woman into a small and stuffy bedroom on the
other side of the hall. “We had better not speak while we are waiting
and--we had better wait in the dark.”

In the strange, stuffy, darkened little room the five sat in silence.
Footsteps passed often in the street outside, and twice some one went
through the hall. A half hour they waited thus. Then a heavier footstep
warned them of Meyan’s coming. A minute later, the front door opened
again and admitted--as Trant felt from the effect of the first tone which
reached the man waiting at his side--Eva Silber. After several minutes
Trant turned up the light and motioned to the two strangers who had come
with him. They immediately rose and left the room.

“I am going to submit you both to a very trying ordeal,” Trant said to
his clients, in a tone so low it could not reach the hallway, “and it
will require great self-control on your part. Within five, or I hope at
most ten, minutes I am going to show you into Meyan’s room, where you
will find, among other persons, Meyan himself and Miss Silber. I want
you to promise that neither of you will attempt to question or to speak
to Miss Silber until I give you leave. Otherwise I cannot allow you to
go in there, and I have my own reasons for wanting you to be present.”

“If it is essential, Mr. Trant--” the elder Edwards said.

Trant looked at the young man, who nodded.

“Thank you,” said the psychologist; and he went out and closed the door
upon them.

Fully a quarter of an hour had passed, in spite of Trant’s promise to
summon them in ten minutes, before the psychologist again opened the
door and ushered them into the room they already knew as Meyan’s.

The long table in the center of the room had been cleared, and behind it
three men sat in a row. Two of these were the strangers who had come
with Trant, and the cases they had carried, together with the one Trant
himself had brought, stood open under the table. The man who sat between
these two was Meyan. Near the table stood Miss Silber.

At sight of her, Winton Edwards made one swift step forward before he
recollected the promise he had made, and checked himself. Eva Silber had
grown pale as death. She stood now with small hands clenched tight
against her breast, staring into the face of the young American she
loved. Trant closed the door and locked it.

“We can begin now, I think,” he said.

He stooped at once over the instrument cases and brought out from them
three folding screens, about eighteen inches square when extended, which
he set on the table--one in front of each of the three men. At the bottom
of each screen was a circular hole just large enough for a man’s arm to
go through; and at Trant’s command the men put their arms through them.
Stooping again swiftly over the instrument cases, Trant took out three
sphygmographs.

He rapidly adjusted these on the arms of the three men, and set in
motion the revolving drums, against which the pencil points traced their
wavy lines on smoked paper. His clients, leaning forward in their
interest, could then understand the purpose of the screens, which were
designed to hide the pitilessly exact records from the three men.

For several minutes Trant allowed the instruments to run quietly, until
the men had recovered from the nervousness caused by the beginning of
the test.

“I am going to ask Miss Silber to tell you now, as briefly as she can,”
he said, after a pause, “the circumstances of her father’s connection
with the Russian revolution which brought him to the state you have
seen, and the reasons why she has left you to go with this man to
Russia.”

“To Russia?” broke from Winton Edwards.

“To Russia, yes!” The girl’s pale cheeks glowed. “You have seen my
father, what he is, what they have made of him, and you did not know he
was a Russian? You have seen him as he is! Let me tell you--you, who wear
proudly the badge of your revolution fought in seven short years by your
great-grandfathers--what my father was!

“Before I was born--it was in the year 1887--my father was a student in
Moscow. He had married my mother the year before. The czar, finding that
even the teachings he had been advised to permit made people dangerous,
closed the universities. Father and his fellow students protested. They
were imprisoned; and they kept my father, who had led the protest, so
long that I was three years old before he saw his home again!

“But suffering and prison could not frighten him! In Zurich, before he
went to Moscow, he had been trained for a doctor. And seeing how
powerless the protest of the students had been, he determined to go
among the people. So he made himself a medical missionary to the
poorest, the most oppressed, the most miserable; and wherever he was
called to carry a cure for disease, he carried, too, a word of hope, of
courage, of protest, a cry for freedom!

“Late one night, in a terrible snowstorm,” she went on, “just twenty
years ago, a peasant brought to our door a note, unsigned for the sake
of safety, it seemed, telling father that an escaped political prisoner
was dying of exposure and starvation in a hut on a deserted farm ten
miles from the town. My father hurried to his horse and set out, with
food and fagots, and by morning, through the cold and deep snow, he
reached the place.

“There he found a man apparently freezing to death, and fed and warmed
him,” said the girl; “and when the fellow was able to tell his pitiful
tale, father boldly encouraged him, told him of the organization of
protest he was forming, and asked him to join. Little by little father
told him all he had done and all his plans. At nightfall father said
farewell and turned to the door, where he found himself facing a spy,
who held a pistol at his head. In the fight that followed, father was
able only to wound the other upon the chest with the blunt knife they
had used to cut their food, before the spy called a second confederate
down from the loft, and father was overcome.

“On the information of these police spies, without trial of any
sort--father’s friends could discover only that the name of his betrayer
was Valerian Urth--father was sentenced to solitary confinement in an
underground cell for life. And my mother--because she sent food and
fagots to a supposed convict--was exiled to Siberia! Ten years ago, her
sister, who took me, received word that she died on the convict island
of Sakhalin; but my father”--she gasped for breath--“lived, at least!”

She stopped as suddenly as she had begun. Trant, who had stooped to
watch his records more closely when the name of the police spy was
mentioned, still kept his gaze steadfastly upon his instruments.
Suddenly he motioned to the girl to complete her narrative.

“Some years ago.” she said, “when I was eighteen, I left my mother’s
sister and went back to my father’s friends, such of them as were still
free,” she continued. “Many who had worked with him for the organization
had been caught or betrayed. But others and more had come in their
places; and they had work for me. I might move about with less suspicion
than a man. So I helped prepare for the strikes which at last so
terrified the czar that on the thirtieth of October he issued his
manifesto to free those in prison. I had helped to free my father with
the rest. I took him to Hungary and left him with friends while I came
here. Now, do you not understand why I am going back?” She turned in
pitiful appeal to young Edwards. “It is because there is work again in
Russia for me to do.”

She checked herself again and turned to Trant to see if he would force
her still to proceed. But he was facing intently, as if fascinated, the
strange hammering man and his two stranger companions; yet he was not
watching their faces or their figures at all. His eyes followed the
little pencil points which, before each of the three, continually traced
their lines of record. Then he took quickly from his pocket a folded
paper, yellow with age, worn, creased, and pierced with pin marks. In
the sight of all he unfolded it swiftly upon the table before the three,
refolded it, and put it back into his pocket. And though at sight of it
no face changed among the three, even Trant’s clients could see how one
line now suddenly grew flat, with low elevations, irregular and far
apart, as the pencil point seemed almost to stop its motion over the
smoked paper of the man in the middle, Meyan.

“That is all,” said Trant, in a tone of assured triumph, as he
unstrapped the sphygmographs from their wrists. “You can speak now, Mr.
Edwards.”

“Eva!” cried Winton Edwards, in wild appeal. “You are not married to
this man?”

“Married? No!” the girl exclaimed in horror. “Until last Thursday, when
he came to the office, I never saw him. But he has come to call me for
the cause which must be to me higher and holier than love. I must leave
my love for the cause of Russia. I must go and nurse our soldiers on the
battlefield. I have been promised a full pardon if I will do so.”

Meyan now, with a heavy slouch of his muscular body, left his two
companions at the table and moved up beside the girl. “Have any more of
you anything to say to her before she goes back with me to Russia?”

“To her? No,” Trant replied. “But to you--and to these gentlemen”--he
motioned to the two who had sat at the table with Meyan--“I have to
announce the result of my test, for which they are waiting. This elder
gentleman is Ivan Munikov, who was forced to leave Russia eight years
ago because his pamphlet on ‘Inalienable Rights’ had incurred the
displeasure of the police. This younger man is Dmitri Vasili, who was
exiled to Siberia for political offenses at thirteen years of age, but
escaped to America. They both are members of the Russian revolutionary
organization in Chicago.”

“But the test--the test!” cried Vasili. “The test”--the psychologist
turned sternly to face Meyan--“has shown as conclusively and irrefutably
as I could hope that this man is not the revolutionist he claims to be,
but is, as we suspected might be the case, an agent of the Russian
secret police. And not only that! It has shown just as truly, though
this fact was at first wholly unsuspected by me, that he--this agent of
police who would have betrayed the daughter now and taken her back to
Russia to be punished for her share in the previous agitation--is the
same agent who, twenty years ago, betrayed the father, Herman Silber,
into imprisonment! True name from false I do not know; but this man, who
calls himself Meyan now, called himself then Valerian Urth!”

“Valerian Urth!” Eva Silber cried, staggering back into Winton Edwards’
arms.

But Meyan made a disdainful gesture with his huge, fat hands. “Bah! You
would try to prove such things by your foolish test?”

“Then you will not refuse, of course,” Trant demanded sternly, “to show
us if there is a knife scar on your chest?”

Even as Meyan would have repeated his denial, Vasili and Munikov leaped
from the rear of the room and tore his shirt from his breast. The
psychologist rubbed and beat the skin, and the blood rose to the
surface, revealing the thin line of an almost invisible and time-effaced
scar.

“Our case is proved, I think!” The psychologist turned from the two who
stared with hate at the cringing spy, and again faced his clients.

He unlocked the door, and handed the key to Munikov; then, picking up
his instrument cases and record sheets, with Miss Silber and his clients
he left the room and entered the landlady’s sitting room.




CHAPTER V. AN INTRUSION OF SCIENCE.


“When I received Mr. Edwards’ letter this morning,” Trant said, in
answer to the questions that showered upon him, “it was clear to me at
once that the advertisement he inclosed depended for its appeal on
reminding Eva Silber of some event of prime importance to herself, but
also, from the wording employed, of popular or national significance as
well. You further told me that October 30th was a special holiday with
Miss Silber. That, I found, to be the date of the czar’s manifesto of
freedom and declaration of amnesty to political prisoners. At once it
flashed upon me: Eva Silber was a Russian. The difference between the
seventeenth given in the advertisements and the thirtieth--thirteen
days--is just the present difference between the old-style calendar used
in Russia and ours.

“Before going to the Crerar Library, then, it was clear that we had to
do with a Russian revolutionary intrigue,” he went on. “At the library I
obtained the key to the cipher and translated the advertisement,
obtaining the name of Meyan and his address, and also the name and
address of Dmitri Vasili, a well-known revolutionary writer. To my
surprise, Vasili knew nothing of any revolutionist named Meyan. It was
inconceivable that a revolutionary emissary should come to Chicago and
he not know of it. It became necessary to find Meyan immediately.

“My first direct clew was the hammering that we heard in this house. It
was too much to suppose that in two separate instances this hammering
should be heard, and in each case Eva’s father he present and no other
discoverable agent, and that still he should have nothing to do with it.
Obviously, it must have been Herman Silber who did the hammering at
Eva’s home and here in this house. It was obvious, too, that Herman
Silber was the ‘your own’ of the advertisement.

“To test Meyan, whom we found in the saloon, was not difficult,” said
Trant. “I arranged to have him overhear some one speaking of an arrest
at Warsaw, which would at once suggest itself as a hotbed of Russian
revolutionists to either a revolutionist or a police agent; but the idea
would certainly give positive and very opposite reactions if the man
were a true revolutionist or if he were a spy. Meyan’s pulse so
strengthened and slowed--as under a pleasurable stimulus--that I felt I
had received confirmation of my suspicions, though I had not then the
information which would enable me to expose the man. To secure this I
sought out Dmitri Vasili. He introduced me to Munikov, who had been a
friend of Silber before his imprisonment and between them I got the
history of Herman Silber and his daughter.

“I explained to Munikov and Vasili that the methods of the psychological
laboratory would be as efficacious in picking out a spy among true men
as I have many times proved them to be in convicting the criminal.

“Every emotion reacts upon the pulse, which strengthens in joy and
weakens in sorrow, changes with anger and with despair; and as every
slightest variation it undergoes can be detected and registered by the
sphygmograph--I felt certain that if I could test the three men together
by having Miss Silber tell her father’s story aloud, I could determine
conclusively by comparison of the records of the two true revolutionists
with that of Meyan, whether his sympathies were really with the
revolutionist party. I arranged with Munikov and Vasili to come here
with me tonight, and, after Meyan had arrived, they left us here and
went to him as representatives of the revolutionary movement to ask his
credentials.

“When he could furnish none,” Trant went on, “they proposed, and in fact
forced him, into this test. It is a dangerous thing to endeavor to pass
oneself off as a revolutionist, and it was safer for him to submit to a
test than to have his mission frustrated by incurring not only
suspicion, but possibly death. Completely ignorant of the pitiless
powers of psychological methods, and confiding in his steely nerves,
which undoubtedly have carried him through many less searching ordeals,
he agreed. You saw how perfectly he was able to control his face and
every movement of his body while the test went on. But you can see
here”--Trant spread out his strips of smoked paper--“on these records,
which I shall preserve by passing them through a bath of varnish, how
useless that self-control was, since the sphygmograph recorded by its
moving pencil the hidden feelings of his heart.

“As I lay these side by side, you can see how consistently at each point
in the story Munikov and Vasili experienced the same feelings; but Meyan
had feelings which were different. I did not dream, of course, when I
started the test that I would discover in Meyan the same man who had
betrayed Herman Silber. It was only when at her first mention of
Valerian Urth I obtained from Meyan this startling and remarkable
record,” he pointed to a place where the line suddenly had grown almost
straight and flat, “that I realized that if the man before me was not
himself Urth, he at least had some close and, under the circumstances,
oppressive connection with him.

“Eva Silber still had the note that had been sent to summon her father
on the errand of mercy which had caused his imprisonment. She gave it to
me before you entered the room. I was certain that of all men in the
world there was but one who could recognize or feel any emotion at sight
of that yellowed and time-worn paper; and that man was Valerian Urth,
who had used it to betray Herman Silber.

“I showed it to Meyan, and obtained this really amazing reaction which
ends his record.” The psychologist pointed to the record. “It assured me
that Meyan and Urth were one.”

“This is amazing, Mr. Trant,” Cuthbert Edwards said. “But you have left
unexplained the most perplexing feature of all--the hammering!”

“To communicate with one another from their solitary cells, Russian
prisoners long ago devised a code of spelling letters by knocking upon
the wall--a code widely spread and known by every revolutionist. It is
extremely simple; the letters of the alphabet”--Trant took from his
pocket a slip of paper--“are arranged in this manner.”

He set down rapidly the alphabet, omitting two letters, arranged in four
lines, thus:

      a b c d e f
      g h i k l m
      n o p r s t
      u v w x y z

“A letter is made,” the psychologist explained, “but giving first the
proper number of knocks for the line, a short pause, then knocks for the
number of the letter in the line. For instance, _e_ is one knock and
then five; _y_ is four knocks and then five.

“By means of this code I translated the figures in the advertisement and
obtained Meyan’s name and address. I suppose he used it not only in the
advertisement, but at the office, because his long experience had taught
him that Herman Silber, as many another man condemned to the horrors of
a Russian prison for a term of years, had probably lost the power of
speech, and continued to communicate, in freedom, by the means he had
used for so many years in prison.”

“Wonderful, Mr. Trant, wonderful!” exclaimed Cuthbert Edwards. “I only
regret that we can do nothing to Meyan; for there is no law, I think, by
which he can be punished.”

The psychologist’s face darkened. “Vengeance is not ours,” he answered
simply. “But I have given the key of Meyan’s room to Munikov!”

The elder Edwards, clearing his throat, moved over to Eva and put his
arm about her as though to protect her. “Since you must see that you
cannot go back to Russia, my dear,” he said awkwardly, “will you not let
me welcome you now into your place in my home?”

And as the son sprang swiftly forward and caught his father’s hand,
Trant took up his instrument cases under his arm, and went out alone
into the warm April night.




[Transcriber’s Note: This story originally appeared in the May 1, 1915
issue of Top-Notch Magazine.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DECIDEDLY ODD ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the
trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project
Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use
this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be
modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in
the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
  and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the
use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the
owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate
royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each
date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your
periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such
and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you
in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not
agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You must
require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works
possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received
the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S.
federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

